JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: The
death toll
in Haiti from Hurricane Matthew
soars and
the storm thrashes Florida's
East Coast, knocking
out power for half-a-million
people.
Plus: The Obama administration
accuses the
Russian government of hacking
the Democratic
National Committee and other
political organizations.
Then: returning home after ISIS.
Iraqis take back Fallujah, only
to find an
abandoned city gutted by two
years of war.
JANE FERGUSON: In order to take
back Fallujah
city, the Iraqi military had to
completely
empty the city, and the fighting
that happened
afterwards destroyed everything
that the eye
can see.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And while the
candidates prepare
for the second presidential
debate, we take
on this week in politics with
Mark Shields
and Michael Gerson.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's been a day
to hunker down
along the Atlantic shores of
Florida.
Hurricane Matthew plowed north
with winds
of 110 miles an hour, and there
were late
reports of heavy damage in the
state's northeastern
corner.
In the storm's wake, the tragedy
in Haiti
only deepened, with more than
800 people dead.
Hari Sreenivasan is in New
Smyrna Beach, Florida,
and he begins our coverage.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Three days
after the hurricane
struck Haiti, the water is
receding, and survivors
are finding bodies by the
hundreds.
Ingrid Arnesen is a freelance
journalist who's
been out for a first-hand look.
INGRID ARNESEN, Freelance
Journalist: The
south is in a catastrophic
situation.
The hurricane flattened the two
main cities,
destroyed the main roads
connecting each three
departments, pretty much a third
of Haiti,
destroyed bridges.
So, reaching the south is
impossible
HARI SREENIVASAN: The death toll
is expected
to rise sharply as teams enter
remote areas
of the hard-hit southwestern
peninsula.
For example, one official
working in mountainous
Beaumont, on the outskirts of
Jeremie, says
his group found more than 80
bodies that had
not yet been recorded by the
government.
The storm blasted Haiti with
winds of 145
miles an hour and several feet
of rain, and
left utter devastation in one of
the world's
poorest countries.
MAN (through translator): We
have big problems
here.
There are almost no houses left
standing.
We don't have food, nor a
hospital to get
health care.
MAN (through translator): We
have nothing.
The hurricane took shirts from
our backs.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tens of
thousands are now
homeless, and their crops have
been destroyed.
But relief efforts are gearing
up.
The U.S. military expects to
deliver food
and water to hard-hit areas.
and international aid groups are
appealing
for donations.
Margaret Traub is with the
International Medical
Corps.
MARGARET TRAUB, International
Medical Corps:
Right now, I would say the
Haitian people
need food, shelter, clean water,
some medical
supplies.
We are on Ile-a-Vache, which is
an island
about a 45-minute boat ride from
Les Cayes.
In one of the hospitals where
they reported
some cholera patients, they
didn't have cleaning
supplies, they didn't have
antibiotics.
So, we're very worried about,
while people
may have survived the storm,
they're going
to not survive the disease.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Meanwhile,
people along
Florida's Atlantic Coast spent
this day waiting
out Matthew.
The eye of the storm stayed just
off shore,
and may have spared the state a
catastrophic
blow.
Governor Rick Scott repeatedly
made clear
the danger had not passed.
GOV.
RICK SCOTT (R), Florida: There's
no victory
lap here.
The victory lap is when the
storm leaves our
state.
And I hope it doesn't hit
Georgia, South and
North Carolina.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The city of
Jacksonville
may get the worst of it, as the
hurricane
passes this evening.
From there, it will push north
along Georgia
and the Carolinas, keeping
hundreds of miles
of coastline under threat for 15
inches of
rain and a nine-foot storm
surge.
The governors of South Carolina
and Georgia
warned today that time is
running out.
GOV.
NIKKI HALEY (R), South Carolina:
This is the
last time you will see me before
we are actually
in storm mode.
So, please evacuate.
GOV.
NATHAN DEAL (R), Georgia:
There's nothing
certain about this other than
the danger,
and we should pay due heed to
the warnings
that have been given.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In Washington,
President
Obama met with the head of the
Federal Emergency
Management Agency, and repeated
his own warning.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
The potential for storm surge,
flooding, loss
of life and severe property
damage continues
to exist, and people continue to
need to continue
to follow the instructions of
their local
officials over the course of the
next 24,
48, 72 hours.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Thousands
along the Florida
coast did heed those warnings
from authorities
to evacuate and move further
inland.
They found themselves in places
like Orlando
in Central Florida.
For them, today was a long day
of watching
and waiting.
Gloria and David Floyd live in
Satellite Beach,
southeast of Orlando.
Their home and yard took some
damage, but
they said it could have been
much worse.
Even so, they headed to a hotel
on higher
land.
DAVID FLOYD, Florida: Once it
got to be a
Category 4, I knew that it could
get really
ugly, and that is when I knew
that I decided
I had better leave.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The McChrystal
family waited
out the storm at the same hotel.
LIZ MCCHRYSTAL, Florida: I'm a
little nervous.
I think today will be a long
day, until we
can get back tomorrow and see
what -- you
know, what the results are.
But most likely, a lot of people
in the neighborhoods
local are lucky so far.
So I'm going to feed off the
good luck.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Others may not
be so lucky,
and there's economic disruption
as well.
Coastal businesses and tourism
are shut down,
and airlines have canceled
thousands of flights
through tomorrow.
The entire last half-hour on the
drive out
to New Smyrna Beach here in
Florida, the power
has been out, businesses have
been shut down,
and people are slowly starting
to creep back
in, trying to figure out how
they are going
to try to get things back to
normal, and that's
not even the worst of it.
The northeast corner of Florida
has gotten
it much worse -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hari, tell us
more about what
you have seen.
I think you started in Orlando.
You have been making your way to
where you
are now, in New Smyrna Beach.
Tell us about what you have
seen.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Well, just a
little while
ago, we were at kind of one of
the central
park areas in New Smyrna.
Huge trees.
A woman that was passing by
said, look, these
trees take 100 years to grow,
100 years to
die, and this is an just
unbelievable sight
just to see so many trees down
all over the
place.
There is a boatyard or a drydock
where people
keep their boats.
The roofs have been peeled off.
Boats have been kind of tossed
around inside
it as if they were toys.
The force of this hurricane, it
depends on
which house you look at, which
street you
look down, whether there is
debris, whether
there is walls and fences that
have been pulled
down, whether there is water
that is slowly
inundating around these
low-lying areas.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hari, I think a
lot of people
don't appreciate what storm
surge means, but
the water is lethal in a storm
like this.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That's right.
In St. Augustine and further
north here in
Florida and also in Savannah,
Georgia, and
Charleston, the real big concern
is what a
two-foot or an eight-foot storm
surge could
do, because so many of these
cities are low-lying.
And these storm surges just
really push.
Almost imagine like a wave
taking that last
bit of water right onto land.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Hari, from
what you can
tell, most of the people along
this coastal
area did evacuate?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes, I think
that was the
sort of silver lining to this is
that a lot
of people heeded the warnings.
They didn't put first-responders
at risk.
Authorities were relatively
happy about that.
There are, of course, people who
decided to
try and ride out the hurricane.
And we won't know until
everybody gets back
what the damage was, but most
people heeded
the warnings from the local and
national authorities
who said get out of the way.
And now people are very anxious,
of course,
to see what the state of their
property is
like, how everything fared
through the storm.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hari Sreenivasan
reporting
for us from New Smyrna Beach,
Florida.
Hari, we want you to get
someplace where you
are dry and safe.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: The
United States formally charged
that Russia
organized the hacking of
Democratic political
sites and state election
systems.
The Department of Homeland
Security and the
director of national
intelligence said it's
an effort to interfere with the
election process.
We get more now from David
Sanger of The New
York Times.
David, thanks for being with us.
What's the significance of this
and the fact
that it comes, what, almost four
months after
we first heard about these
hacks?
DAVID SANGER, The New York
Times: That's right,
Judy, and we reported in late
July that the
government and intelligence
agencies already
had high confidence that it was
Russia.
What was interesting about this
statement,
there's sort of three big
things.
The first is that the White
House decided
to formally do this.
Usually, President Obama has
been very reluctant
to name foreign actors who were
believed to
be behind big hacks.
They named North Korea in the
Sony hack two
years ago, but declined to name
China in the
hack of more than 20 million
security files
from the Office of Personnel
Management, and
didn't name Russia when they
hacked into the
State Department White House and
Joint Chiefs
of Staff e-mails, mostly
unclassified e-mails.
But, in this case, I think they
felt that
it was getting too close and
that they had
to issue a warning to the
Russians not the
mess around on November 8 with
voter rolls
or other elements.
I think a second important part
of it, Judy,
is that, by naming them, the
president has
now got to announce what he's
going to do
about it.
And they haven't said that.
He could do economic sanctions.
He could take overt action.
But there is always a worry in
cyber that
you get into an escalation
issue, where we
do something, they do something
back, and
it can get much bigger.
Then I think the third
interesting point is
that they said the Russian
leadership itself
had to be behind some of the DNC
hacks.
It couldn't have just been done
at a lower
level.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I noticed
they identified
-- they said most senior
officials.
So what are the options, David,
for the administration
to do something in response?
DAVID SANGER: Well, there are a
few, Judy.
One is simply to say, by issuing
a warning,
they have put them on notice,
we're watching,
we know what you're doing, so
don't mess around
a month from now.
Option number two would be to
make the use
of new presidential directive
that President
Obama signed after the Sony
hacks -- I think
it was signed in April of 2015
-- that basically
would allow them to do economic
sanctions,
the way you do against terrorism
suspects
or nuclear proliferators.
The third option would be to
issue a finding,
a presidential intelligence
finding, which
is, by its nature, secret, and
authorize the
National Security Agency and
U.S. Cyber Command
to take countervailing action
against Web
sites or servers inside Russia
or to do something
else that would show the Russian
government
and particularly President Putin
that we can
play this game, too.
But, as I said, that's risky,
because, you
know, you never know where that
stops, and
you're on the same kind of
escalation ladder
you are in any other conflict or
in nuclear
theory.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, finally,
David, this certainly
signals that the administration
believes,
if the Russians have the
capacity to do this,
they must have the capacity to
do other damage.
DAVID SANGER: Well, they do.
And you don't know what other
leaks come from
the Russians, but just this
evening, just
as all of this was happening, we
saw leaked
e-mails posted on WikiLeaks that
were written
in communications with John
Podesta, who helped
run Mrs. Clinton's campaign,
that, if it turns
out to be like the other
material given to
WikiLeaks or other groups, could
turn out
to be that the Russians are
already spreading
more of this around.
We don't have the attribution on
that yet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it
certainly does seem
to be a new -- we have reached a
new level
in outside governments'
involvement in American
politics.
DAVID SANGER: We certainly have.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Sanger --
David Sanger,
we thank you.
DAVID SANGER: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meantime, Russia
moved today
to keep its troops in Syria
indefinitely.
The State Duma ratified a treaty
with Syrian
President Bashar al-Assad.
It permits Russia to use a major
air base
on Syria's coast for as long as
it wants.
But, in Washington, Secretary of
State John
Kerry said Russia and Syria
should be investigated
for war crimes, for attacking
hospitals and
other civilian targets.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: They're
beyond the accidental now, way
beyond, years
beyond the accidental.
This is a targeted strategy to
terrorize civilians
and to kill anybody and
everybody who's in
the way of their military
objectives.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.N. Security
Council votes
tomorrow on a resolution urging
a truce in
Aleppo, and an end to all
airstrikes on the
city.
Russia signaled that it will
veto the proposal.
The Philippines is putting joint
military
exercises with the U.S. on hold
in the South
China Sea.
The country's new president,
Rodrigo Duterte,
said today that he wants a
current ongoing
exercise to be the last during
his six-year
term.
In a speech, he warned
Washington -- quote
-- "Do not treat us like a
doormat, because
you will be sorry for it.
I can always go to China" -- end
quote.
The pace of hiring in the U.S.
economy slowed
a little in September.
Today's Labor Department report
tells the
story: Employers added a net of
156,000 jobs,
despite the fact manufacturers
cut their work
force for a second month.
The unemployment rate ticked up
a 10th of
a point to 5 percent, as more
people started
looking for work.
And on Wall Street: The Dow
Jones industrial
average lost 28 points to close
at 18240.
The Nasdaq fell 14 to close at
5292.
And the S&P 500 slipped seven.
All three indexes were down for
the week,
after three straight weeks of
gains.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the surprising
recipient of this year's Nobel
Peace Prize;
Iraqi families returning to
what's left of
their liberated city; setting
the stage for
the second presidential debate;
and much more.
The recipient of the Nobel Peace
Prize was
announced this morning, its
laureate chosen
from a record 376 nominees.
And, as in years past, the Nobel
Committee
had both a surprise and a
message to convey.
Chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret
Warner reports.
JUAN MANUEL SANTOS, Colombian
President (voice-over):
I don't receive this in my name,
but in the
name of all Colombians,
especially the millions
of victims from this conflict we
have been
suffering for more than 50
years.
MARGARET WARNER: The new Nobel
Peace Prize
laureate, Colombian President
Juan Manuel
Santos, met the news by vowing
to ensure that
this hemisphere's longest war
will finally,
officially be ended.
JUAN MANUEL SANTOS (through
translator): To
this cause, I will dedicate my
efforts for
the remainder of my days.
Thanks to God, peace is near.
Together, together, as a nation,
we will construct
it.
MARGARET WARNER: The Nobel
announcement came
just five days after Colombian
voters narrowly
rejected a peace deal negotiated
between Santos'
government and the FARC rebel
group.
But, in Oslo, Norway, the Peace
Prize Committee
voiced hope.
KACI KULLMANN FIVE, Chair,
Norwegian Nobel
Committee: The fact that the
majority of the
voters said no to the peace
accord doesn't
necessarily mean that the peace
process is
dead.
What the no-side rejected wasn't
the desire
for peace, but a specific peace
agreement.
MARGARET WARNER: In a break with
Nobel tradition
honoring leaders who settle
conflicts, Santos'
counterpart in the peace talks,
FARC leader
Rodrigo Londono wasn't
recognized by the committee.
Yet, on Twitter today, Londono
congratulated
Santos and said: "The only prize
to which
we aspire is that of peace with
social justice
for Colombia, without
paramilitarism, without
retaliation, nor lies."
A prominent former captive of
the FARC, Ingrid
Betancourt, said the rebels
should share the
prize.
She was kidnapped in 2002 as she
campaigned
for the Colombian presidency
herself, and
was held hostage for six years.
INGRID BETANCOURT, Former FARC
Captive: It's
hard for me to say it, but I
have to be just.
And even though they were my
captors and I
suffered in their hands, I think
that it's
true that they transformed
themselves.
This wouldn't have been possible
eight years
ago, when I was abducted.
MARGARET WARNER: Ironically,
even as President
Santos is recognized
internationally, he is
facing a political headwinds at
home.
His approval ratings plummeted
below 30 percent
early this year, amid rising
food prices and
dissatisfaction with his
handling of the peace
talks.
It is unclear if today's honor
will make any
difference in his standing.
Many Colombians, after a war
that claimed
more than 220,000 lives, felt
the peace agreement
was overly generous to the FARC.
For some, the Nobel may do
little to change
their minds.
MAN (through translator): I
think it is a
farce that that man has won the
prize.
I think it is a farce.
MARGARET WARNER: Yet the Peace
Prize appeared
to energize others who have
backed the Colombian
president.
MANUEL ECHEVARRIA, Peace Accord
Supporter
(through translator): This
international support
is going to apply pressure on
all involved
parties in the negotiation.
We think this helps.
They all have to understand that
the world,
too, wants peace in Colombia.
MARGARET WARNER: When Santos
himself sat down
with the "NewsHour" in February,
he acknowledged
the difficulties ahead,
especially reintegrating
thousands of former fighters
into society.
JUAN MANUEL SANTOS: Kids that
only know how
to shoot, they were born in the
guerrilla
camps.
And these have to be retrained
and reeducated.
And there's a process.
It's cumbersome, it's difficult,
but it's
necessary.
MARGARET WARNER: But then, the
prospects of
an accord that the people would
accept seemed
promising.
JUAN MANUEL SANTOS: A peace
agreement is never
perfect.
Always, you have people from one
side or the
other criticizing it.
MARGARET WARNER: Now both sides
have to renegotiate,
even as a cease-fire with the
FARC formally
expires at the end of this
month.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to the final
report in
our three-part series this week,
The Fight
for Iraq.
The coming battle to reclaim
Mosul from ISIS
will be the capstone in the
campaign to drive
the extremists from Iraq.
But the hard work after the guns
go silent
of repairing both the city and
relations with
the people there is as
important.
Tonight, again with the support
of the Pulitzer
Center on Crisis Reporting,
special correspondent
Jane Ferguson and producer Jon
Gerberg report
from one city reclaimed from
ISIS where the
fighting was only half the
battle.
JANE FERGUSON: Now an empty
concrete ghost
town, Fallujah was once a
populous city, just
an hour's drive west from
Baghdad.
ISIS quickly took this city two
years ago,
when they swept into Iraq from
Syria and seized
land across the country.
They ruled the city and its
people until the
Iraqi army pushed them out in
June.
In order to take back Fallujah
City, the Iraqi
military had to completely empty
the city,
and the fighting that happened
afterwards
destroyed everything that the
eye can see.
Now the atmosphere in this still
largely empty
city is incredibly eerie.
Khalil Abass is looking forward
to rebuilding.
He is getting his family ready
to go back
to their village on the
outskirts of Fallujah.
All their belongings have once
again been
packed, including even chickens
for food.
He is optimistic.
KHALIL ABASS, Iraq (through
translator): I'm
happy I'm going back to my home
with my family
to live a stable, normal life.
If God wills it, we will get our
old lives
back.
JANE FERGUSON: Not everyone can
do that.
Only a small handful of families
have been
able to return to Fallujah City
so far.
Thousands of others are crammed
into camps
like this one, not yet allowed
to return.
Many have not been cleared by
the security
forces.
These people are trying to get
home.
They ran from the intense
fighting when the
Iraqi army recaptured Fallujah
City from ISIS.
And now they want to return.
At a sorting center outside the
city, they
hope to be given government
permissions to
go home.
But first they will have to
persuade the men
inside here they are not ISIS
members in disguise.
BRIG.
GEN.
HAMZA AL MOHAMMED, Iraqi Army
(through translator):
All of the government security
branches are
here, national security,
intelligence, anti-terrorism,
military intelligence and police
intelligence.
JANE FERGUSON: Each of those
groups has a
list of suspected ISIS members,
and everyone
who applies to return to
Fallujah has to be
checked they are not wanted.
When names are read out, the men
here answer
black or white.
Anyone on the black list is
arrested.
BRIG.
GEN.
HAMZA AL MOHAMMED (through
translator): This
is a family that wants to return
to Fallujah.
This family is under the name of
someone,
right?
His name is Ahmad.
White?
We screened the name of the head
of the family.
The rest are women and children.
JANE FERGUSON: The word in
Arabic for white,
abyad, means they are free to
go.
Only then are they given the
permit to return
home.
They are also given a free SIM
card with some
credit, and then they head up
the road to
Fallujah.
For those who do return, this is
what greets
them.
The streets are now silent.
By the time the gunfire finally
finished in
Fallujah City, most of those
living here had
fled.
Every highway, avenue and
neighborhood is
now smashed and scarred by war.
There are few signs of life.
According to the local
government, only about
5 percent of the pre-ISIS
population has so
far returned to the city.
Many houses are still
booby-trapped, says
the government.
It will take a huge cleanup
effort to make
every street safe again.
Some families are missing
relatives, picked
up by the army as they fled the
city.
Security forces detained
Fallujans as they
evacuated, checking for ISIS
fighters.
Those they let go were sent to
camps like
this.
Hamad Khalaf was detained with
his four grown
sons, but only he and two of
them were released.
That was four months ago, and he
has heard
nothing of his other two sons.
HAMAD KHALAF, Iraq (through
translator): They
kept them.
Someone came and said, "I saw
this one with
ISIS."
My son is normal.
He is not with ISIS.
JANE FERGUSON: In many cases, he
says, this
came down to personal grudges.
The process was often arbitrary,
as neighbor
turned on neighbor.
HAMAD KHALAF (through
translator): It happened
to thousands of people, not just
my sons.
They are innocent.
I know they are innocent.
They are being held without
explanation.
If a person hates another, he
will tell the
police this person is with ISIS.
JANE FERGUSON: Hamad's wife,
Fatima, is distraught
at not knowing where they are.
FATIMA KHALAF, Iraq (through
translator):
I feel that they might not
release them to
me or they might keep them for
another month
or two.
I might not see them.
I might die and never see them
again.
JANE FERGUSON: Americans fought
two battles
for Fallujah in 2004, and were
never able
to free the city from the grip
of the Sunni
extremists, al-Qaida in Iraq.
Sunnis here rejected the
toppling of Saddam
Hussein and the rise of a Shia
government
in Baghdad, and many welcomed
al-Qaida in
Iraq as their defenders.
The legacy of that bloodshed
means some people
in this camp still hold bitter
memories of
American involvement in their
country.
MAJID SALEH, Iraq (through
translator): I
lost 31 family members to the
Americans.
Of them, my sister's son was
four months old.
My sister's son, his sister and
their father,
they were all killed.
What more can I say?
JANE FERGUSON: After the U.S.
military withdrawal
from Iraq, policies of the
Shia-led Baghdad
government became more
sectarian.
Sunni people in areas like
Fallujah were left
feeling disenfranchised.
Many initially welcomed ISIS, a
new, more
ambitious version of al-Qaida in
Iraq.
Sohaib Al-Rawi, governor of
Fallujah's Anbar
Province, and a Sunni himself,
saw that sectarian
strife firsthand.
SOHAIB AL-RAWI, Governor of
Anbar Province
(through translator): The Sunni
community
faced injustice.
Many leaders were killed or
driven from the
country.
So, the community feels
oppressed.
I do not excuse the Sunni
extremists, but
this is what inflamed the
political and security
situation in the Sunni
provinces.
JANE FERGUSON: Today, the Iraqi
government's
attempts to restore Fallujah
include mass
security and intelligence
screening of all
of its residents.
But that won't give Fallujans
back the lives
they once had, which now only
live in memory.
MAJID SALEH (through
translator): What else
can we say about Fallujah?
We used to have livestock and
tasty food.
Now we eat the food of
livestock.
Fallujah is gone.
It's lost.
Fallujah is lost.
JANE FERGUSON: Fallujah has been
destroyed
by war before, and rebuilt.
The repeated explosions of
violence here are
unlikely to end until its people
feel like
a real part of today's Iraq.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Jane
Ferguson
in Fallujah, Iraq.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": how
Georgia's
changing demographics are also
changing elections;
plus, Mark Shields and Michael
Gerson analyze
the week's news.
But, first: The twists and turns
keep coming
in the race for the White House
just two days
before Donald Trump and Hillary
Clinton meet
in their second presidential
debate.
John Yang reports.
JOHN YANG: Late today, a new
storm around
Trump.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Hello.
How are you?
Hi.
JOHN YANG: The Washington Post
released a
2005 videotape in which Trump is
heard talking
in vulgar terms about trying and
failing to
seduce a woman.
DONALD TRUMP: When you're a
star, they let
you do it.
You can do anything.
BILLY BUSH, "Access Hollywood":
Whatever you
want.
DONALD TRUMP: Grab them by the
(EXPLETIVE
DELETED).
(LAUGHTER)
DONALD TRUMP: You can do
anything.
JOHN YANG: It comes as Hillary
Clinton has
been blasting Trump for his
treatment of women,
and Trump has been threatening
to make an
issue out of Bill Clinton's
infidelities.
In a statement, Trump apologized
and said
the tape was "locker room
banter, a private
conversation.
Bill Clinton has said far worse
to me on the
golf course.
Not even close."
Campaigning in Las Vegas,
Democratic running
mate Tim Kaine reacted to the
tape.
SEN.
TIM KAINE (D-VA), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
It's just -- I mean, it makes me
sick to my
stomach.
I don't like to even say the
words that he's
used in the past when he calls
women pigs,
dogs and -- I should be
surprised and shocked.
I'm sad to say that I'm not.
JOHN YANG: Earlier, Trump fired
a new broadside
on a signature issue,
immigration, as he met
with a Border Patrol unit that
endorsed him.
He charged agents are being
told, in effect,
to look the other way as
Election Day approaches.
DONALD TRUMP: They're letting
people pour
into the country, so they can go
and vote.
MAN: They want to hurry up and
fast-track
them, so they can go ahead and
be able to
vote for these elections.
DONALD TRUMP: And these are the
professionals.
These are the people that are on
the border.
You hear a thing like that, it's
-- it's a
disgrace.
JOHN YANG: Running mate Mike
Pence vowed that
he and Trump will end illegal
immigration
once and for all.
Even with current controversies
swirling around
him, Trump weighed in on an old
one, a racially
charged 1989 rape case.
Five teenagers, all minorities,
were convicted
of assaulting a white banker in
Central Park,
exonerated by DNA evidence and
then paid $41
million in a settlement with New
York City.
But Trump told CNN: "They
admitted they were
guilty.
The fact that that case was
settled with so
much evidence against them is
outrageous."
Clinton was off the trail today
preparing
for Sunday's debate.
The campaigns are also watching
the impact
of Hurricane Matthew.
Florida Governor Rick Scott, a
Republican
who is backing Trump, rejected a
Clinton campaign
request to extend voter
registration beyond
next Tuesday's deadline.
In addition, there could be
troubles with
the millions of mail-in ballots
that went
out this week, just as hundreds
of thousands
of voters in that toss-up state
were told
to evacuate.
Meanwhile, President Obama took
advantage
of a fund-raising trip to
Chicago to cast
his vote.
Despite prodding from reporters,
he wouldn't
violate the sanctity of his
secret ballot,
but the expression on his face
left little
doubt who he voted for.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, you have
heard a lot
in this election year about
changing demographics
in some states, rising numbers
of minority
voters who are scrambling the
calculus for
the candidates and the parties.
But one of the places with the
most dramatic
change under way is Georgia.
It hasn't voted Democratic in 24
years, but
is giving Hillary Clinton reason
to hope this
year.
I flew there this past weekend.
At the Sweet Auburn Festival on
Saturday,
neighbors and tourists showed up
to eat, drink,
and enjoy local musicians.
In this Atlanta neighborhood,
known as the
historic heart of the civil
rights movement
here, some are clear who they're
voting for.
WOMAN: I'm looking forward to
there being
a female president.
And also I like the way she --
her campaign
is run.
I like the way she speaks.
And I think she will do well to
getting this
world back into the order.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Voters like this
are exactly
what Hillary Clinton must have
to turn Georgia
blue for the first time since
1992, says Emory
University's Andra Gillespie.
ANDRA GILLESPIE, Emory
University: You need
African-Americans to turn out in
record numbers,
just as they did in 2008 and
2012.
I suspect that Hillary Clinton
is going to
do extremely well in the state
amongst blacks
who do turn out to vote.
We should expect that they're
going to make
up about 30 percent of the
electorate here
in Georgia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In fact, due to
dramatic demographic
changes, growing numbers of
blacks and other
minorities, Clinton is relying
on voters like
33-year-old Charisse Price.
CHARISSE PRICE, Georgia: I'm
voting for her
because I feel that she's the
candidate that
most aligns with my values and
the issues
that are important to me.
And I'm excited about what she
offers as the
most qualified candidate in
history.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Democrats also
hope to capitalize
on negative feelings toward
Donald Trump among
the Latino community that has
more than doubled
since 2000.
Latinos make up just under 10
percent of the
population in Georgia, but they
are now less
than 3 percent of registered
voters.
Omar Rodriguez Esparza is a
naturalized U.S.
citizen from Mexico, who says he
cannot support
Trump.
OMAR RODRIGUEZ ESPARZA, Georgia:
It really
did bother me when he started to
offend my
community, calling us different
things that
were obscene and derogatory.
And for me to stand behind a
person that speaks
that way about our community, I
just can't
do it.
That's like turning my back
against my own
community.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But Georgia
Republicans say
they are not ready to simply
cede minority
voters to the Democrats.
LEO SMITH, Georgia GOP: I think
what they're
underestimating is the number of
African-Americans
who are now saying, I am
independent in my
thinking about politics.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Leo Smith is the
Georgia GOP's
minority engagement director.
LEO SMITH: The Georgia
Republican Party decided
in 2013 that we would embrace a
strategy to
target, micro-target
demographics that we
have not been successful with.
And so we developed a strategy
to make sure
that we connected with blacks,
that we connected
with Latin Americans, Latino
Americans, that
we connected with Asian
Americans.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In 2008, 98
percent of blacks
who voted went Obama.
But, this year, Democrats say
the key is not
the percentage, but the number
of African-Americans
who vote.
STACEY ABRAMS (D), Georgia House
Minority
Leader: So, you're just now
starting the real
push.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Democrat Stacey
Abrams is the
minority leader in the Georgia
State House
of Representatives.
STACEY ABRAMS: Most of the
pre-work that happens
in elections is persuading
people to believe
that your candidate has the
right belief set,
that they are the right person.
Where we are now is convincing
people that
they need to turn out and do
something about
it.
We have six weeks.
And it's going to be -- it's a
heavy lift,
but it's a very doable lift.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Doable, but with
a special
challenge among younger voters.
STACEY ABRAMS: She has a problem
particularly
amongst young African-Americans
who appear
to be soft on her.
So, it doesn't mean that they're
going to
defect and vote for Donald
Trump.
I think the questions is, do
they stay home
or do they vote for somebody
like Gary Johnson?
SHAIDAH EHEHOSI, College
Student: For me,
voting for her would be like
settling.
And I don't want to settle.
I would rather, like, stay
single, right?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Shaidah Ehehosi,
a sophomore
at Georgia State University,
says she feels
pressure to back Clinton, but,
as of now,
doesn't think she can do that.
SHAIDAH EHEHOSI: She's so
sneaky, and she's
just not honest.
And Donald Trump is openly
racist, you know,
openly ridiculous, basically.
But Hillary is so covert with
her actions,
that that scares me as well.
And it's just so -- it's tough.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In this state,
with a population
in transition, Clinton's
challenge is not
only to turn out the Democratic
base, especially
African-Americans, but also to
turn out more
white voters than Democrats have
won in the
past five presidential
elections.
Thanks to the controversial
candidacy of Donald
Trump, the key could be white
women like Jessica
Mayer, who voted for Mitt Romney
last time,
but says Trump is out of the
question.
She's considering Clinton.
JESSICA MAYER, Georgia: I don't
know if I
want to vote for her or not.
I like her.
I don't dislike her, but I like
Gary Johnson
a lot, too.
I don't want to vote for it just
because she's
a woman, even though I'm -- I
feel like I'm
leaning that way, because it'd
be nice to
have a woman in the White House.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The support of
voters like
Jessica is essential to a
long-shot Democratic
victory here, says strategist
Gordon Giffin.
GORDON GIFFIN, Democratic
Strategist: To win
a state like Georgia, you have
got to appeal
to a broad cross-section of
genders.
You can't just go after one
gender.
Broad cross-section of all parts
of our citizenry.
So, to win here, Hillary Clinton
would have
to get a substantial part of the
white vote,
not just the minority vote.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Again, Andra
Gillespie:
ANDRA GILLESPIE: In the context
of the first
debate performance, and Donald
Trump's lashing
out at Alicia Machado for her
weight and other
kinds of things, these are the
kinds of messages
that could play well to suburban
white voters
who are on the fence about
Trump, and maybe
she can convince them to come to
her side.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Young Georgia
Republicans like
Jake Evans acknowledge Trump's
weakness among
women who would normally lean
right.
JAKE EVANS, Georgia: Millennials
overall are
a generation of equality on the
gender side,
on the race side, and he
undoubtedly leads
some people to believe that he
doesn't fully
further gender equality motives.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Even so, Evans
himself backs
Trump, albeit without
enthusiasm.
JAKE EVANS: I will vote for
Donald Trump because
I think he aligns more with my
personal ideologies,
less government, lower taxes,
less regulation.
I believe, personally, that's
what's best
for the country, but I will do
it reluctantly.
And so I think it's an election
of the lesser
of two evils, to be honest with
you, for a
lot of millennials.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Clinton
supporters say she
can win that argument, if her
campaign targets
all the voters who are turned
off by Trump.
GORDON GIFFIN: If 30 percent of
the white
vote in Georgia votes for
Hillary Clinton,
she will carry the state of
Georgia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We also found
that, even among
Clinton backers here, there is
concern that
the deep divisions in the
country will undermine
her if she's elected.
FRAN MARSHALL, Georgia: I think
that she is
going to have as difficult a
time as President
Obama had as far as
congressional support.
I hope that they do not meet
secretly the
night that she is elected and
decide that
they are going to vote no for
everything that
she may present to Congress.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's a
snapshot right
now of Georgia, where new voter
registration
ends next Tuesday, October 11.
It's also the moment we turn to
the analysis
of Shields and Gerson.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and
Washington Post columnist
Michael Gerson.
David Brooks is away.
Gentlemen, welcome.
So, there was a lot of news that
we learned
about late this afternoon that
has to do with
this campaign.
But, Mark, I do want to start
quickly with
a question about Georgia.
The very fact -- and you heard
to some of
the voters we talked to -- the
very fact that
a state that Mitt Romney won by
eight points
four years ago, where it's close
-- I mean,
it's still uphill for Hillary
Clinton, but
it's close because of what we
talked about.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
No, it is.
Defined -- the interviews
defined the enthusiasm
gap.
It isn't just on one side.
It's on both sides.
There's minimal excitement.
And, for Hillary Clinton, I
think what came
through in your piece is, it's
not a question
of the percentage of the
African-American
vote, in addition trying to get
30 percent
of the white vote, but it's
numbers.
She could get high percentages,
but if you
don't get numbers in the turnout
-- but the
hope, obviously, is that Georgia
can move
eventually, if not this time,
into the category
of Virginia, North Carolina,
states that have
changed, Colorado and Nevada.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Michael.
MICHAEL GERSON: Yes.
I think that the Republican fear
is exactly
the Virginia example.
When Barack Obama won it in his
first term,
it was the first time Virginia
had gone Democratic
since 1964.
MARK SHIELDS: That's right.
MICHAEL GERSON: And now it's not
even close.
It's because -- Hillary Clinton
is ahead by
about eight points in Virginia.
The state has gotten more
diverse, more Hispanics
and Asians, more
college-educated people.
It's gone in a certain direction
that I think
Republicans fear for a couple of
these states
that region.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, as we said at
the outset,
there's been a blizzard of news
late this
afternoon, Mark, starting with
the Obama administration
naming Russia, saying high
officials in Russia
were behind these hacks against
the Democratic
Party and other Democratic
figures.
Then you had WikiLeaks coming
out soon after
with information about John
Podesta, who is
Hillary Clinton's campaign
chairman, and some
e-mailed exchanges over nuclear
energy, and
then the Washington Post story,
which I think
I want to start with that,
essentially releasing
the audiotape -- and you heard
it in John
Yang's report -- showing --
videotape showing
Donald Trump's lewd remarks
about women about
10 years ago.
MARK SHIELDS: Judy, let's get
one thing straight.
This is not locker room talk.
This is not a preteen,
adolescent finding
dirty words.
This is a 60-year-old man being
obscene, obscene
toward -- in discussing women,
boasting, bragging
in the worst and most offensive
way.
And I just think the political
implications
are profound.
Senator Kelly Ayotte, Republican
in New Hampshire,
has said she would vote for
Donald Trump,
but will not endorse him.
In a debate this past week, she
was asked,
do you consider Donald Trump to
be an appropriate
role model for the children of
New Hampshire?
"Absolutely" was the end of her
answer, was
immediately pounced on.
She apologized.
Cut a spot.
Every Republican candidate in
the country
who is in a competitive race is
going to be
asked in the next week, whether
in a debate
or where else, by opponents or
by the press,
do you consider Donald Trump to
be an appropriate
role model for the children of
our state?
And it just -- as far as the
women's vote
you just reported on in Georgia,
it makes
it so, not simply difficult.
It makes it almost impossible
for somebody
with self-respect, who has a
mother or sister
or a daughter, you know,
somebody like this
in Abraham Lincoln's chair.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Michael, how do
you assess
this?
MICHAEL GERSON: Well, I think
the problem
here is not just bad language,
but predatory
language, abusive language...
MARK SHIELDS: It is.
MICHAEL GERSON: ... demeaning
language.
That indicates something about
someone's character
that is disturbing, frankly,
disturbing in
a case like this.
And I think evangelicals have a
particular
problem right now.
I mean, they are the people who
argued, many
of whom, leaders, argued that
character counts
during the Bill Clinton years.
And now character apparently
doesn't count
at all.
So, I think there's a deep
tension here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Trump's
response was to
say, well, Bill Clinton has used
far worse
language than you heard here on
the golf course,
he said.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
That's a hell of a defense.
And the other thing he said was
just more
disparaging remarks he made
earlier that it
was just entertaining or
amusing.
But Michael makes a central
point here.
The Republicans have, with some
pride -- George
W. Bush won the White House by
promising to
restore dignity to the Oval
Office.
And they were or presented
themselves as the
family -- the party of family
values.
It is impossible to say that
today about the
Republican standard-bearer in
any way.
And I just have to say that
we're forgetting
moral values.
We're just -- we're talking
about the Supreme
Court.
Character doesn't count.
The only thing that counts is
the Supreme
Court, apparently.
MICHAEL GERSON: And there will
be a question
on Sunday night, certainly.
There are women in the audience
who are going
to be asking questions during
the debate.
There will be a question saying,
why should
I support this disgusting boor?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes, we're told
-- we learned
today this is a group of
uncommitted voters
in the Saint Louis area who have
been put
together by the Gallup
Organization.
But, Michael, turning to the
other -- one
of the other stories of this
afternoon, the
administration announcing after
four months
of saying they weren't ready to
say whether
it was Russia officially behind
these hacks
-- they're now saying it was
Russian -- top
Russian officials who were
hacking the Democratic
National Committee.
MICHAEL GERSON: Yes.
This has all the appearance of a
foreign power
trying to undermine structures
of legitimacy
of an American election.
That is a serious matter.
I would -- if I were the media,
I would be
wary of using anything that came
out of these
document dumps which serves the
purpose of
a foreign power.
But, at the very least,
Americans have to
discount this.
This is an attempt to hijack and
change American
democracy by a foreign power.
It can't be accepted.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, I mean, I
agree.
The presidential option of
economic sanctions
are on the table and, you know,
what the retaliation
will take.
But I would say it's the end of
the reset
with China.
That's for certain.
And the conclusion, the
statement that only...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Reset with
Russia.
MARK SHIELDS: With Russia.
Excuse me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
MARK SHIELDS: Only -- only
Russia's senior-most
officials could have authorized,
said the
director of intelligence and the
Homeland
Security Department.
This is pretty profoundly
serious.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And seemingly
hand in hand,
or at least the timing is -- may
be more than
coincidental.
WikiLeaks released the John
Podesta e-mails.
So, he's, of course, Hillary
Clinton's campaign
chairman.
He's run his own lobbying firm
in Washington
for a number of years.
And we haven't really seen much
of that yet,
but it's supposed to be having
to do with
nuclear energy and...
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
No, it's -- New York Times had a
big story
last year, front-page story,
about the sale
of that uranium company that was
authorized
by the United States government
to Russia,
with Russia controlling it.
And the allegations are that
there were contributions
made to the Clinton Foundation
which were
kept from the Obama White House.
Now, whether in fact that's
confirmed, that's
pretty serious.
That's going to cause some real
tensions,
understandably, if that's the
case, within
the Democratic family.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm sure
reporters are
going to continue to pore over
this.
MARK SHIELDS: Exactly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Michael, we
have got -- we
do have the second presidential
debate coming
up Sunday night in Saint Louis.
MICHAEL GERSON: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It is a different
format.
Is one or the other -- we have
talked about
all the news that may or may not
be asked
about.
But does this format benefit one
or the other
of these two people?
MICHAEL GERSON: I think so.
This is a format that doesn't
reward aggression.
It rewards empathy, explanation.
Those are not Trump strong
points.
He has not done a run-through, a
full run-through
of this, according to his own
campaign, in
private.
He had an event in New Hampshire
last night
which was supposed to be like a
-- this sort
of event, and he did terribly.
It is quite possible that he
will have a second
miserable performance.
And I don't think that will make
Republicans
denounce him broadly.
It will mean just that the
balloon is out
of Republican morale completely.
And they will start looking at
2020, knowing
that they don't have a competent
candidate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see
this debate?
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: Half the questions
will be from
the audience...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Moderators.
MARK SHIELDS: ... and half from
the moderator,
and from people.
The problem with these debates
like this is
that you can't really prepare
for them, because
the questions are so individual
and personal
or even idiosyncratic.
Now, it does -- Secretary
Clinton has a lot
richer and deeper experience in
doing these,
obviously, than Donald Trump.
But the people at home, you
can't -- I can't
attack you, Michael, if we're
doing a town
meeting or a town format.
You have to answer the question
that is asked.
And what people at home are
gauging, Judy,
is, how does this candidate
respond to the
questioner?
Do they show respect to the
Do they try to understand why
the questioner
is asking that?
Do they respond to the question?
That is really what -- I mean,
is there empathy?
Is there a human connection
between the two?
It's where Barack Obama beat
Mitt Romney in
2012.
He lost the voters on who was a
stronger leader,
who had a vision for the future,
but on who
cares about people like me, he
trounced Mitt
Romney.
And I think that will be a gauge
of this Sunday
night.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it sort of
faded into
the back of the news today,
Michael, but it
was just three or four nights
ago that we
had the vice presidential debate
between Mike
Pence and Tim Kaine.
A lot of conversation about that
in the day
or so after it, but did that
have a lingering
effect on this election of any
kind?
MICHAEL GERSON: Very marginal
temporary moral
boost for Republicans, who were
looking for
any good news after a pretty
disastrous week.
But when you analyze it, Mike
Pence could
only defend Donald Trump in some
circumstances
by projecting an image of
himself, as though
he were -- that Trump held his
views on Russia
or his views on Syria.
And that's really not true.
So, it was a weird way to defend
the person
at the top of your ticket.
And I think that was noticed.
MARK SHIELDS: It's a good point.
I thought Mike Pence, upon
reflection to me,
came across a little bit like
your favorite
aunt who refuses, in spite of
first-person
evidence that grandpa has been
drunk and disorderly
in public, that, says, no, no,
grandpa would
never do that, even though
grandpa is being
taken off in handcuffs.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: I mean, Donald
would never say
those things about our good
neighbors to the
south.
MICHAEL GERSON: When he did.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
Donald would never say that
about our good
co-religious Muslim friends.
And I think the Democrats did a
terrible disservice,
the Clinton campaign did, to Tim
Kaine.
Tim Kaine had the earned
reputation of being
one of the most respected and
well-liked,
and not cheap partisan members
of the United
States Senate.
And they turned him into an
attack dog.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: He didn't come
across authentic.
It wasn't good.
And it was -- it just really --
I think, for
short-term benefit, I think they
tarnished
the brand, which is an awfully
good brand.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last thing I want
to ask you
two about very quickly is the
Libertarian
candidate for president, Gary
Johnson.
He -- if this is a close
election, Michael
and Mark, he could -- his --
whatever he gets
could make a difference.
We have seen him this week
talking more about
foreign policy and saying he --
it's OK not
to have an opinion about it.
Just in 10 seconds, how much of
a factor is
he?
MICHAEL GERSON: Marginally hurts
Hillary Clinton,
but probably not a big factor.
MARK SHIELDS: Less today than he
did last
week, and perhaps less tomorrow
than he did
today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Shields,
Michael Gerson,
we thank you both.
And we hope you will be sure to
join us right
here on this Sunday for special
live coverage
of that presidential debate.
It starts at 9:00 p.m. Eastern.
Gwen Ifill is preparing for
"Washington Week,"
which airs later this evening --
Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: We are in the middle
of debate
season, as the candidates take
each other
on up close, as well as from a
distance.
It's also the season of
real-life consequences,
as voters begin to decide how to
pick not
only a president, but also
senators and members
of the House.
We assess the choices and
preview Sunday's
second presidential face-off
tonight on "Washington
Week" -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will be
watching.
And on "PBS NewsHour" Saturday:
Hari Sreenivasan
continues our on-the-ground
coverage of Hurricane
Matthew and its aftermath --
Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tonight we
brought you information
from New Smyrna Beach, Florida,
but, as you
know, Hurricane Matthew is
working its way
up the Eastern Seaboard from
Florida across
Georgia and South Carolina.
We will continue to provide the
latest information
on this hurricane and the damage
that it's
causing all weekend long.
You can watch on the broadcast
the "PBS NewsHour
Weekend."
You can also follow online on
all our social
channels, from Twitter and
Snapchat to Facebook.
Thanks for watching.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will be
following all
that.
Thanks, Hari.
And, as we said, we will be back
right here
on Sunday night for the second
presidential
debate.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and good night.